Add data validation (#1477)
sherpa/sherpa: docs/developer/index.rst

Notes on the design and changes to Sherpa.

.. _handling_nd:

N-dimensional data and models
-----------------------------

In order to support N-D data sets, models and data objects are
designed to work with flattened arrays, so a 1D dataset has ``x`` and
``y`` for the independent and dependent axes, and a 2D dataset will
have ``x0``, ``x1``, and ``y`` values, with each value stored as a 1D
`ndarray`. This makes it easy to deal with filters and sparse or

> irregularly-placed grids.

Author: Here's my current attempt

![screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/224638/189700150-c2e02ee5-9517-45c0-b329-5e34a41608c7.png)

Notes on the design and changes to Sherpa.

.. _handling_nd:

N-dimensional data and models
-----------------------------

Models and data objects are
designed to work with flattened arrays, so a 1D dataset has ``x`` and
``y`` for the independent and dependent axes, and a 2D dataset will
have ``x0``, ``x1``, and ``y`` values, with each value stored as a 1D
`ndarray`. This makes it easy to deal with filters and sparse or
irregularly-placed grids.

::

  >>> from sherpa.data import Data1D, Data1DInt, Data2D

> As examples, we have a one-dimension dataset with data values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As examples, we have a one-dimensional dataset with data values
```

(dependent axis, y) of 2.3, 13.2, and -4.3 corresponding to the
independent axis (x) values of 1, 2, and 5::

  >>> d1 = Data1D("ex1", [1, 2, 5], [2.3, 13.2, -4.3])

An "integrated" one-dimensional dataset for the independent axis
bins 23-44, 45-50, 50-53, and 55-57, with data values of

> 12, 14, 2, and 22:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
12, 14, 2, and 22 looks like this:
```
Just making that a full sentence with a verb.

  >>> d2 = Data1DInt("ex2", [23, 45, 50, 55], [44, 50, 53, 57], [12, 14, 2, 22])

An irregularly-gridded 2D dataset, with points at (-200, -200),
(-200, 0), (0, 0), (200, -100), and (200, 150) can be created
with:

  >>> d3 = Data2D("ex3", [-200, -200, 0, 200, 200], [-200, 0, 0, -100, 150],
  ... [12, 15, 23, 45, -2])

A regularly-gridded 2D dataset can be created, but note that the
arguments must be flattened:

  >>> x1, x0 = np.mgrid[20:30:2, 5:20:2]
  >>> shp = x0.shape

>   >>> x0 = x0.flatten()
>   >>> x1 = x1.flatten()
>   >>> y = np.sqrt((x0 - 10)**2 + (x1 - 31)**2)
>   >>> d4 = Data2D("ex4", x0, x1, y, shape=shp)

Reviewer: If we have 2D data for x, we typically also have 2D data for y.  Here, we just make that data for the example, but in a typical use case, we would get the x  and y in some other way (e.g. read from a file) and they wuld both be 2d to begin with.
```suggestion
  >>> y = np.sqrt((x0 - 10)**2 + (x1 - 31)**2)
  >>> x0 = x0.flatten()
  >>> x1 = x1.flatten()
  >>> y = y.flatten()
  >>> d4 = Data2D("ex4", x0, x1, y, shape=shp)
```

Author: I don't really see this as an improvement but as I wrote it I may biased...

validation checks when fields are changed, rather than when the data
is used. This has been done primarily by marking field accessors as
property attributes, so that they can apply the validation checks when
the field is changed.  The intention is not to catch all possible
problems, but to cover the obvious cases.

.. _data_design_ndim:

Data dimensionality
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

`~sherpa.data.Data` objects have gained a `~sherpa.data.Data.ndim`
field, which is used to ensure that the model and data dimensions
match when using the `~sherpa.data.Data.eval_model` and
`~sherpa.data.Data.eval_model_to_fit` methods.

.. _data_design_size:

The size of an object
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The `~sherpa.data.Data.size` field describes the size of a data object,
that is the number of individual elements. Once a data object has
its size set it can not be changed (this is new to Sherpa 4.14.1,
as in previous versions you could change fields to any size).

.. _data_design_point_vs_integrated:

Point versus Integrated
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There is currently no easy way to identify whether a data object
requires integrated (low and high edges) or point axes (the coordinate

> at which to evaluate the model).

Author: Created #1575 to track this

`~sherpa.data.Data` class.

To ensure that any filter remains valid, the independent axis is
marked as read-only. The only way to change a value is to change the
whole independent axis, in which case the code recognizes that the
filter - whether just the `~sherpa.data.Data.mask` attribute or also
any region filter for the `~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` case - has to
be cleared.

.. _data_design_validation:

Validation
^^^^^^^^^^

Fields are converted to `ndarray` - if not `None` - and then checked
to see if they are 1D and have the correct size. Some fields may have
extra checks, such as the `~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.grouping` and
`~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.quality` columns for PHA data which
are converted to integer values.

There is limited support for NumPy masked arrays, but the assumption
is that and data has been masked before being added to a
`~sherpa.data.Data` object.

One example of where there is incomplete validation is that the
`~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.bin_lo` and
`~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.bin_hi` fields are not checked to ensure
that both are set, or that they are in descending order, that the
``bin_hi`` value is always larger than the correspondnig ``bin_lo``

> value, or that there are no overlapping bins.

Author: I think basically I felt that working out what to do with the `bin_lo`/`bin_hi` fields was well in the "future work" category as I don't understand the ramifications. I know you have been recently thinking about it (eg #1564) so we can track this for the future.

  ``ndim`` value (ignoring those models whose dimensionality
  is set to ``None``). If there is a mis-match then a
  :py:class:`sherpa.utils.err.ModelErr` is raised.

> * as :ref:`descibed below <data_design_ndim>`, the dimensions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* as :ref:`described below <data_design_ndim>`, the dimensions of
```

  data and model can be compared.

An alternative approach would have been to introduce 1D and 2D
specific classes, from which all models derive, and then require the
parent classes to match. This was not attempted as it would require
significantly-larger changes to Sherpa (but this change could still be
made in the future).

.. _data_design:

The data class
--------------

Prior to Sherpa 4.14.1, the `~sherpa.data.Data` object did not have
many explicit checks on the data it was sent, instead relying on

> checks when the data was used. This has been changed to apply
> validation checks when fields are changed, rather than when the data

Reviewer: Just avoiding to start several sentences in a raw with "This has been"
```suggestion
checks when the data was used. Now, validation checks  are done
when fields are changed, rather than when the data
```

`~sherpa.data.Data1D` case, and that the individual components are
checked to ensure they have the same size.

The handling of the independent axis is mediated by a "Data Space"
object (`~sherpa.data.DataSpaceND`, `~sherpa.data.DataSpace1D`,
`~sherpa.data.IntegratedDataSpace1D`, `~sherpa.data.DataSpace2D`, and
`~sherpa.data.IntegratedDataSpace2D`) which is handled by the
`_init_data_space` and `_check_data_space` methods of the
`~sherpa.data.Data` class.

To ensure that any filter remains valid, the independent axis is
marked as read-only. The only way to change a value is to change the
whole independent axis, in which case the code recognizes that the
filter - whether just the `~sherpa.data.Data.mask` attribute or also
any region filter for the `~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` case - has to
be cleared.

.. _data_design_validation:

Validation
^^^^^^^^^^

Fields are converted to `ndarray` - if not `None` - and then checked
to see if they are 1D and have the correct size. Some fields may have
extra checks, such as the `~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.grouping` and
`~sherpa.astro.data.DataPHA.quality` columns for PHA data which
are converted to integer values.

> There is limited support for NumPy masked arrays, but the assumption
> is that and data has been masked before being added to a
> `~sherpa.data.Data` object.
> 

Reviewer: The sentences in borked (technical term in British English) and it's also explained elsewhere, so just delete?

```suggestion

```

> One example of where there is incomplete validation is that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example incomplete validation is that the
```

Author: Did you mean

```suggestion
One example of incomplete validation is that the
```

Reviewer: Yours sounds better ;-)

:py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.ArithmeticConstantModel` instance and then
combined with the remaining model instance (``XSpowerlaw``).

For those models that require the full set of elements, such as

> multiplication by a :term:`RMF` or a convolution kernel, requires

Reviewer: sentence borked. Not sure my suggestion fixes it though.
```suggestion
multiplication by a :term:`RMF` or a convolution kernel, this requires
```

I realize that this was text that's just reformatted and not written here.

creating a model that can "wrap" another model. The wrapping model
will evaluate the wrapped model on the requested grid, and then apply
any modifications.  Examples include the

> :py:class:`sherpa.instrument.PSFModel` class, which creats

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:py:class:`sherpa.instrument.PSFModel` class, which creates
```

:py:class:`sherpa.instrument.ConvolutionModel` instances, and the
:py:class:`sherpa.astro.xspec.XSConvolutionKernel` class, which
creates :py:class:`sherpa.astro.xspec.XSConvolutionModel` instances.

> Wen comnining models, :py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.BinaryOpModel`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When combining models, :py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.BinaryOpModel`
```

> Wen comnining models, :py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.BinaryOpModel`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When combining models, :py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.BinaryOpModel`
```

(actually, this check is handled by the super class

> :py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.CompositeModel`), will ensure that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:py:class:`~sherpa.models.model.CompositeModel`), this approach will ensure that the
```
